DEVELOPMENT
===========

This file contains some collected notes from development to help guide future developers in adding features or understanding why existing features work the way they do. 


Hangout Plugins
---------------

The Google API for creating hangout plugins is relatively straightforward. The full API docs are available here: https://developers.google.com/+/hangouts/ and cover all the methods that are available within an application.

There are a few minor gotchas, though, when it comes to setting up a development environment for hangouts. You can programmatically force a client to load *one* hangout app when they load their hangout instance. This is done through a GET parameter appended to the url: `gid=HANGOUT_APP_ID`. The app id is set in `conf.json`, and should be a 12 digit integer. You're welcome to use our official hangout app id in your installation as well; our app id is `337607402011`. It should work with any installation equally well, since clients provide it the unhangout server host they connected from on load. 

If you want to make changes to the app, it gets a little bit tricky. First, you need to register a new hangout app witih Google: https://code.google.com/apis/console/ A hangout app is primarily an .xml file that specifies the markup and javascript that comprises the app. When the hangout interface loads, it makes separate HTTP requests for each of the `hangout.xml` files it needs for each app. Thus the server hosting those files needs to be accesible _to every hangout participant_. You set the fully qualified path for this file (and the associated privacy/support/terms documents) in the Google Developer API console. Although `localhost` will work here in some situations, I ran into some weird issues with apps that didn't have the "make public" flag set (at the bottom of the hangout app setup page), which in turn requires all the pieces of the app to be publically accessible (i.e., not on `localhost`.) So my recommendation is to get your instance of the unhangout server running on a publically accessible server, and then editing the deployed version's hangout.xml file. You can still use the unhangout-server running on `localhost`; you don't need to constantly deploy the actual server for this to work. The hangout app will happily phone home to a `localhost` address. But the easiest way to work with `hangout.xml` is to edit a pubically-visible version. 

The other option, which I haven't tested, is to maintain two separate hangout app ids; one for production (which points to your production unhangout server) and one for development (which points to `localhost`). This should work too, but I haven't tested it.


Hangout Creation
----------------

There is no Google-provided API for creating a hangout link directly. This is obviously problematic for this system, because we need to be able to quickly route 100+ people to 10+ hangouts relatively rapidly and reliably. There are two well understood strategies for solving this problem: using Google Calendar events as a backdoor to getting hangout urls or building a simple Hangout app to phone home with a newly-created hangout url. We use the former strategy as the primary one, and if it doesn't work, we fall back to the latter.

The calendar-api-based strategy depends on an option in Google Calendar to "create hangout links for every event." If you create a google calendar event on an account with that option enabled, any event created on any calendar for that user will be populated with a "hangoutLink" field. The problem with this strategy is that Google has deprecated the ClientLogin API that let you present a username and password and get a valid API token for that user. This makes it difficult to act on behalf of a dummy user that has this bit set; the remaining OAuth flows that Google provides are predicated on user action and browser interaction of some sort or another. We might eventually shift to using a headless browser to emulate this behavior, but it is too difficult a task at the moment.

Until then, we provide a simple way to "farm" these hangout links. With the server running, you can go to `http://host:port/hangout-farming` and the server will redirect you to google to authenticate your account. After authentication, it will use your token to create a calendar event. If your account has the "create hangout links" option set (which it _must_ if this is going to work) then it will log the URL to redis and make it available for any future session on the platform. This means that before running a big event, you should make sure to farm 20 or 30 urls in advance. Events are created and then immediately deleted so as to not clutter up your calendar. As far as we can tell, 

If there are no farmed urls available, the system falls back to a somewhat-more-clunky user experience. The first user to click "join hangout" will be designated as the hangout creator, and redirected to the "create a new hangout" URL. Included in that URL is our Hangout App Id, which will phone home to the server when the hangout is created successfully. Any requests after the first to join the hangout will be held open while waiting for the hangout to be created, and then redirected to that URL when the hangout has started up. Any later requests, after the hangout has started properly, will be redirected to the hangout. The problem with this approach is that if the designated first user fails to create the hangout for some reason (their account doesn't have a google+ profile, is a Google Apps for Domains account that has hangouts disabled, the plugin is not installed, they are currently in another hangout, etc) then we run into major problems. There are workarounds for these issues, but they add significant complexity and won't necessarily be totally reliable. We recommend farming hangouts in the manner described above.